---
date: "2019-10-13"
title: "Making the Tokio scheduler 10x faster"
description: "October 13, 2019"
---

We've been hard at work on the next major revision of Tokio, Rust's asynchronous
runtime. Today, a complete rewrite of the scheduler has been submitted as a
[pull request][pr]. The result is huge performance and latency improvements.
Some benchmarks saw a 10x speed up! It is always unclear how much these kinds of
improvements impact "full stack" use cases, so we've also tested how these
scheduler improvements impacted use cases like [Hyper] and [Tonic][tonic]
(spoiler: it's really good).

In preparation for working on the new scheduler, I spent time searching for
resources on scheduler implementations. Besides existing implementations, I did
not find much. I also found the source of existing implementations difficult to
navigate. To remedy this, I tried to keep Tokio's new scheduler implementation
as clean as possible. I also am writing this detailed article on implementing
the scheduler in hope that others in similar positions find it useful.

The article starts with a high level overview of scheduler design, including
work-stealing schedulers. It then gets into the details of specific
optimizations made in the new Tokio scheduler.

The optimizations covered are:

- [The new `std::future` task system](#the-new-task-system)
- [Picking a better queue algorithm](#a-better-run-queue)
- [Optimizing for message passing patterns](#optimizing-for-message-passing-patterns)
- [Throttle stealing](#throttle-stealing)
- [Reducing cross thread synchronization](#reducing-cross-thread-synchronization)
- [Reducing allocations](#reducing-allocations)
- [Reducing atomic reference counting](#reducing-atomic-reference-counting)

The major theme is "reduce." After all, there is no code faster than no code!

The article also covers [testing the new scheduler][testing]. Writing correct,
concurrent, lock-free code is really hard. It is better to be slow and correct
than fast and buggy, especially if those bugs relate to memory safety. The best
option, however, is to be fast _and_ correct, so we wrote [`loom`][loom], a tool
for testing concurrency.

Before jumping in, I want to extend some gratitude.

- **[@withoutboats]** and others who worked on Rust's `async / await` feature.
  You did a great job. It is a killer feature.
- **[@cramertj]** and others who designed `std::task`. It is a huge improvement
  compared to what we had before. Also, a great job there.
- **[Buoyant]**, the makers of [Linkerd], and more importantly my employer.
  Thanks for letting me spend so much time on this work. Readers who are in need
  of a service mesh, check out [Linkerd]. It will soon include all the goodness
  discussed in this article.
- **[Go]** for having such a good scheduler implementation.

Grab a cup of coffee and get yourselves comfortable. This is going to be a long
article.

[pr]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio/pull/1657
[testing]: #fearless-unsafe-concurrency-with-loom
[loom]: https://github.com/carllerche/loom/
[@withoutboats]: https://github.com/withoutboats
[@cramertj]: https://github.com/cramertj
[buoyant]: https://buoyant.io/
[linkerd]: https://linkerd.io/
[go]: https://golang.org/

## Schedulers, how do they work?

The role of a scheduler is to schedule work. An application is broken up into
units of work, which we will call _tasks_. A task is _runnable_ when it can make
progress, and is no longer runnable (or _idle_) when it is blocked on an
external resource. Tasks are independent in that any number of runnable tasks
can execute concurrently. The scheduler is responsible for executing tasks in
the running state until they transition back to idle. Executing a task implies
assigning CPU time -- a global resource -- to the task.

The article discusses user-space schedulers, i.e., schedulers that run on top of
operating system threads (which, in turn, are powered by a kernel land
scheduler). The Tokio scheduler executes Rust futures, which can be thought of as
"asynchronous green threads". This is the [M:N threading][mn] pattern where many
user land tasks are multiplexed on a few operating system threads.

There are many different ways of modeling a scheduler, each with pros and cons.
At the most basic level, the scheduler can be modeled as a _run queue_ and a
_processor_ that drains the queue. A processor is a bit of code that runs on a
thread. In pseudocode, it does:

```rust
while let Some(task) = self.queue.pop() {
    task.run();
}
```

When a task becomes runnable, it is inserted into the run queue.

![Scheduling loop](/img/2019-10-scheduler/gen_sched.png)

While it is possible to design a system where resources, tasks, and the
processor all exist on a single thread, Tokio chooses to use multiple threads.
We live in a world where computers come with many CPUs. Designing a
single-threaded scheduler would result in hardware underutilization. We want to
use all of our CPUs. There are a few ways to do this:

- One global run queue, many processors.
- Many processors, each with their own run queue.

[mn]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thread_(computing)#M:N_(hybrid_threading)

### One queue, many processors

In this model, there is a single, global, run queue. When tasks become runnable,
they are pushed onto the tail of the queue. There are multiple processors, each
running on a separate thread. Each processor pops from the head of the queue,
blocking the thread if no task is available.

![Single queue scheduler](/img/2019-10-scheduler/thread_pool.png)

The run queue must support both multiple producers and multiple consumers. The
commonly used algorithm is an [intrusive] linked list. Intrusive implies that
the task structure includes a pointer to the next task in the run queue instead
of wrapping the task with a linked list node. This way, allocations are avoided
for push and pop operations. It is possible to use a [lock-free push
operation][mpsc] but popping requires[^1] a mutex to coordinate consumers.

[^1]:
  It is technically possible to implement a lock-free multi-consumer queue.
  However, in practice the overhead needed to correctly avoid locks is greater
  than just using a mutex.

[intrusive]: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/5004162/what-does-it-mean-for-a-data-structure-to-be-intrusive
[mpsc]: http://www.1024cores.net/home/lock-free-algorithms/queues/intrusive-mpsc-node-based-queue

This approach is commonly used when implementing a general-purpose thread pool,
as it has several advantages:

- Tasks are scheduled fairly.
- The implementation is relatively simple. An off-the-shelf queue can be paired
  with the processor loop sketched above.

> A quick note on fairness. Scheduling fairness means that tasks are scheduled
> first-in, first-out. Tasks that are transitioned to running first are executed
> first. General purpose schedulers try to be fair, but there are use cases,
> like parallelizing a computation using fork-join, where the only important
> factor is how fast the end result is computed and not the fairness of each
> individual sub task.

This scheduler model has a downside. All processors contend on the head of the
queue. For general-purpose thread pools, this usually is not a deal breaker. The
amount of time processors spend executing the task far outweighs the amount of
time spent popping the task from the run queue. When tasks execute for a long
period of time, queue contention is reduced. However, Rust's asynchronous tasks
are expected to take very little time executing when popped from the run queue.
In this scenario, the overhead from contending on the queue becomes significant.

### Concurrency and mechanical sympathy.

To get the best runtime performance out of a program, we must design it to take
advantage of how the hardware operates. The term "mechanical sympathy" was
applied to software by [Martin Thompson][mech-symp] (whose blog, while no longer
updated, still contains much relevant knowledge).

A detailed discussion of how modern hardware handles concurrency is out of scope
for this article. At a 10,000 foot view, hardware is gaining more performance
not by going faster, but by making more CPU cores available to an application
(my laptop has 6!). Each core can perform large amounts of computation in tiny
periods of time. Relatively speaking, actions like cache and memory accesses
takes [much longer][scaled-latency]. Therefore, for applications to be fast, we
must maximize the amount of CPU instructions per memory access. While the
compiler can do a lot of work for us, as developers, we do need to think about
things like struct layout and memory access patterns.

When it comes to concurrent threads, behavior is pretty similar to a single
thread **until** concurrent mutations happen to the same cache line or
[sequential consistency][seq-cst] is requested. Then, the [CPU's cache coherence
protocol][mesi] will have to start working to ensure that each CPU's cache stays
up to date.

This is all to say the obvious: avoid cross thread synchronization as much as
possible because it is slow.

[mech-symp]: https://mechanical-sympathy.blogspot.com
[scaled-latency]: https://web.archive.org/web/20200225202909/https://www.prowesscorp.com/computer-latency-at-a-human-scale/
[seq-cst]: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/atomic/memory_order#Sequentially-consistent_ordering
[mesi]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MESI_protocol

### Many processors, each with their own run queue

Another way to model a scheduler is to use multiple single-threaded schedulers.
Each processor gets its own run queue and tasks are pinned to a specific
processor. This avoids the problem of synchronization entirely. As Rust's task
model requires the ability to queue a task from any thread, there still needs to
be a thread-safe way to inject tasks into the scheduler. Either each processor's
run queue supports a thread-safe push operation (MPSC) or each processor has
**two** run queues: an unsynchronized queue and a thread-safe queue.

![Sharded scheduler](/img/2019-10-scheduler/sharded.png)

This is the strategy used by [Seastar]. Because synchronization is almost
entirely avoided, this strategy can be very fast. However, it's not a silver
bullet. Unless the workload is entirely uniform, some processors will become
idle while other processors are under load, resulting in resource
underutilization. This happens because tasks are pinned to a specific processor.
When a bunch of tasks on a single processor are scheduled in a batch, that
single processor is responsible for working through the spike even if other
procesors are idle.

Most "real world" workloads are not uniform. Because of this, general purpose
schedulers tend to avoid this model.

[seastar]: http://seastar.io/

### Work-stealing scheduler

The work-stealing scheduler builds upon the sharded scheduler model and
addresses the underutilization problem. Each processor maintains its own run
queue. Tasks that become runnable are pushed onto the current processor's run
queue and processors drain their local run queue. However, when a processor
becomes idle, it checks sibling processor run queues and attempts to steal from
them. A processor will go to sleep only once it fails to find work from sibling
run queues.

![Work-stealing scheduler](/img/2019-10-scheduler/work_stealing.png)

At the model level, this is a "best of both worlds" approach. Under load,
processors operate independently, avoiding synchronization overhead. In cases
where the load is not evenly distributed across processors, the scheduler is
able to redistribute. Because of this characteristic, the work-stealing
scheduler is the choice of [Go], [Erlang], [Java], and others.

[go]:
  https://github.com/golang/go/blob/2df5cdbadf5fbcb23f017c9f00b75dc341a69adf/src/runtime/proc.go
[erlang]:
  https://github.com/erlang/otp/blob/17845f5a18f43b16ecafd1a9f9d289fddee54afd/erts/emulator/beam/erl_process.c
[java]:
  https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/concurrent/ForkJoinPool.html

The downside is this approach is far more complicated; the run queue algorithm
must support the stealing operation and **some** cross processor synchronization
is required to keep things running smoothly. If not done correctly, the overhead
to implement the work-stealing model can be greater than the benefits gained.

Consider this case: Processor A is currently running a task and has an empty run
queue. Processor B is idle; it tries to steal tasks and fails, so it goes to
sleep. Then, the task being executed by processor A spawns 20 tasks. The goal
would be for processor B to wake up and steal some of those newly spawned tasks.
To achieve this, the work-stealing scheduler requires some heuristic where
processors signal sleeping sibling processors when they observe new work in
their queue. Of course, this introduces additional synchronization, so this
operation must be minimized.

In summary:

- Minimizing synchronization is good.
- Work-stealing is the algorithm of choice for general purpose schedulers.
- Each processor is mostly independent, but some synchronization is required for
  stealing.

## The Tokio 0.1 scheduler

Tokio first shipped its work-stealing scheduler in [March 2018][first-ship].
This was a first attempt based on some assumptions that turned out to be
incorrect.

First, the Tokio 0.1 scheduler assumed that processor threads should be shut
down if idle for a certain period of time. The scheduler was originally intended
to be a "general purpose" thread-pool executor for Rust futures. When the
scheduler was first written, Tokio was still in the "tokio-core" days. At this
point, the model was that I/O-based tasks would be executed on a single thread
colocated with the I/O selector (epoll, kqueue, iocp, ...). More CPU bound work
could be punted to a thread-pool. In this context, the number of active threads
should be flexible and shutting down idle threads makes more sense. However, the
model shifted to running _all_ async tasks on the work-stealing scheduler, in
which case it makes more sense to keep a small number of threads always active.

Second, it used the [crossbeam][crossbeam] deque implementation. This
implementation is based on the [Chase-Lev deque][chase-lev], which, for reasons
described below, is not a good fit for the use case of scheduling independent
asynchronous tasks.

Third, the implementation was over-complicated. This is due, in part, to this
being my first scheduler implementation. Also, I was over eager in using atomics
in code paths where a mutex would have done just fine. An important lesson
learned is that there are many cases where mutexes are the best option.

Finally, the original implementation contained many small inefficiencies. The
details of Rust's asynchronous model evolved significantly in the early years,
yet libraries maintained API stability over those years. This resulted in some
debt being accumulated that can now be payed back.

With tokio approaching its first major breaking release, we can pay all of that
debt with the lessons learned over those years. It's an exciting time!

[first-ship]: https://tokio.rs/blog/2018-03-tokio-runtime/
[chase-lev]:
  https://www.dre.vanderbilt.edu/~schmidt/PDF/work-stealing-dequeue.pdf

## The next generation Tokio scheduler

Now it is time to dig into what changed in the new scheduler.

### The new task system

First, its important to highlight something **not** part of Tokio, but is
critical to some of the achieved gains: the [new task system][std_task] included
in `std`, designed primarily by [Taylor Cramer][cramertj]. This system provides
the hooks that a scheduler must implement to execute Rust asynchronous tasks,
and it is really well done. It is both much lighter and more flexible then the
previous iteration.

The `Waker` struct is held by resources and is used to signal that a task is
_runnable_ and be pushed into the scheduler's run queue. In the new task system,
the `Waker` struct is two pointers wide, when it used to be much bigger.
Shrinking the size is important to minimize the overhead of copying the `Waker`
value around, as well as taking less space in structs, allowing for more
critical data to fit in the cache line. The custom [vtable] design enables a
number of optimizations which will be discussed later.

[std_task]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/task/index.html
[cramertj]: https://github.com/cramertj
[vtable]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/task/struct.RawWakerVTable.html

### A better run queue

The run queue is at the heart of the scheduler. As such, it is probably the most
critical component to get right. The original Tokio scheduler used [crossbeam]'s
deque implementation, which is single-producer, multi-consumer deque. Tasks are
pushed onto one end and values are popped from the other. Most of the time, the
thread that pushes the value will pop it, however, other threads will
occasionally "steal" by popping the value themselves. The deque is backed by an
array and a set of indices tracking the head and tail. When the deque is full,
pushing onto it will result in growing the storage. A new, larger, array is
allocated and values are moved into the new store.

The ability for the deque to grow comes at a complexity and overhead cost. The
push / pop operations must factor in this growth. Additionally, on growth,
freeing the original array comes with additional difficulties. In a garbage
collected language, the old array would go out of scope, and eventually the GC
would free it. However, Rust does not come with a GC. This means we are
responsible for freeing the array, but threads may be in the process of
accessing the memory concurrently. Crossbeam's answer to this is to use an
[epoch based reclamation strategy][epoch]. While not **terribly** expensive, it
does add non-trivial overhead in the hot path. Every operation must now issue
atomic RMW (read-modify-write) operations when entering and exiting the critical
sections to signal to other threads that the memory is in use and to avoid
freeing.

Because of the cost associated with growing the run queue, it's worth
investigating if growing the queue is even a requirement. This question is what
ended up spurring the rewrite of the scheduler. The new scheduler's strategy is
to use a fixed size per-process queue. When the queue is full, instead of
growing the local queue, the task is pushed into a global, multi-consumer,
multi-producer, queue. Processors will need to occasionally check this global
queue, but at a much less frequent rate than the local queue.

An early experiment replaced the crossbeam queue with a bounded [mpmc] queue.
This did not result in much improvement due to the amount of synchronization
performed by both push and pop. A key thing to remember about the work-stealing
use case is that, under load, there is almost no contention on the queues since
each processor only accesses its own queue.

At this point, I opted to read the Go source closer, and discovered they used a
fixed size single-producer, multi-consumer queue. The impressive thing about
this queue is how little synchronization is needed for it to function. I ended
up adapting the algorithm for use in the Tokio scheduler, making a few changes.
Notably, the Go implementation uses sequential consistency for its atomic
operations (based on my limited knowledge of Go). The version implemented as
part of the Tokio scheduler also reduces some copying in less frequent code
paths.

The queue implementation is a circular buffer, using an array to store values.
Atomic integers are used to track the head and tail positions.

```rust
struct Queue {
    /// Concurrently updated by many threads.
    head: AtomicU32,

    /// Only updated by producer thread but read by many threads.
    tail: AtomicU32,

    /// Masks the head / tail position value to obtain the index in the buffer.
    mask: usize,

    /// Stores the tasks.
    buffer: Box<[MaybeUninit<Task>]>,
}
```

Pushing into the queue is done by a single thread:

```rust
loop {
    let head = self.head.load(Acquire);

    // safety: this is the **only** thread that updates this cell.
    let tail = self.tail.unsync_load();

    if tail.wrapping_sub(head) < self.buffer.len() as u32 {
        // Map the position to a slot index.
        let idx = tail as usize & self.mask;

        // Don't drop the previous value in `buffer[idx]` because
        // it is uninitialized memory.
        self.buffer[idx].as_mut_ptr().write(task);

        // Make the task available
        self.tail.store(tail.wrapping_add(1), Release);

        return;
    }

    // The local buffer is full. Push a batch of work to the global
    // queue.
    match self.push_overflow(task, head, tail, global) {
        Ok(_) => return,
        // Lost the race, try again
        Err(v) => task = v,
    }
}
```

Note that, in this `push` function, the only atomic operations are a load with
`Acquire` ordering and a store with `Release` ordering. There are no
read-modify-write operations (`compare_and_swap`, `fetch_and`, ...) or
sequential consistency. This is important because, on x86 chips, all loads /
stores are already "atomic". So, at the CPU level, [this function has no
synchronization][load-store]. Using atomic operations will impact the compiler
in that it prevents certain optimization, but that's it. The first `load` can
most likely be done safely with `Relaxed` ordering, but there were no measurable
gains in switching.

[load-store]:
  https://www.justsoftwaresolutions.co.uk/threading/intel-memory-ordering-and-c++-memory-model.html

When the queue is full, `push_overflow` is called. This function moves half of
the tasks in the local queue into the global queue. The global queue is an
intrusive linked list guarded by a mutex. The tasks being moved to the global
queue are first linked together, then the mutex is acquired and all the tasks
are inserted by updating the global queue's tail pointer. This keeps the
critical section small.

If you are familiar with the details of atomic memory orderings, you might
notice a potential "issue" with the `push` function as shown above. An atomic
`load` with `Acquire` ordering is pretty weak. It may return stale values, i.e.
a concurrent steal operation may have already incremented the value of
`self.head` but the thread performing the `push` had an old value in the cache
so it didn't notice the steal operation. This is not a problem for the
correctness of the algorithm. In the fast-path of `push`, we only care if the
local run queue is full or not. Given that the current thread is the only thread
that can push into the run queue, a stale `load` will result in seeing the run
queue as more full than it actually is. It may incorrectly determine that the
queue is full and enter the `push_overflow` function, but this function includes
a stronger atomic operation. If `push_overflow` determines the queue is not
actually full, it returns w/ `Err` and the `push` operation tries again. This is
another reason why `push_overflow` will move half of the run queue to the global
queue. By moving half of the queue, the "run queue is empty" false positive is
hit a lot less often.

The local `pop` (from the processor that owns the queue) is also light:

```rust
loop {
    let head = self.head.load(Acquire);

    // safety: this is the **only** thread that updates this cell.
    let tail = self.tail.unsync_load();

    if head == tail {
        // queue is empty
        return None;
    }

    // Map the head position to a slot index.
    let idx = head as usize & self.mask;

    let task = self.buffer[idx].as_ptr().read();

    // Attempt to claim the task read above.
    let actual = self
        .head
        .compare_and_swap(head, head.wrapping_add(1), Release);

    if actual == head {
        return Some(task.assume_init());
    }
}
```

In this function, there is a single atomic load and one `compare_and_swap` with
release. The primary overhead comes from the `compare_and_swap`.

The `steal` function is similar to the `pop` function but the load from
`self.tail` must be atomic. Also, similar to `push_overflow`, the steal
operation will attempt to claim half of the queue instead of a single task. This
has some nice characteristics which we will cover later.

The last missing piece is consuming the global queue. This queue is used to
handle overflow from processor local queues as well as to submit tasks to the
scheduler from non-processor threads. If a processor is under load, i.e. the
local run queue has tasks. The processor will attempt to pop from the global
after executing ~60 tasks from the local queue. It also checks the global queue
when in the "searching" state, described below.

[crossbeam]: https://github.com/crossbeam-rs/crossbeam
[epoch]: https://aturon.github.io/blog/2015/08/27/epoch/#epoch-based-reclamation
[mpmc]:
  http://www.1024cores.net/home/lock-free-algorithms/queues/bounded-mpmc-queue

### Optimizing for message passing patterns

Applications written with Tokio are usually modeled with many small, independent
tasks. These tasks will communicate with each other using message passing. This
pattern is similar to other languages like Go and Erlang. Given how common this
pattern is, it makes sense for the scheduler to try to optimize for it.

Given task A and task B. Task A is currently executing and sends a message to
task B via a channel. The channel is the resource that task B is currently
blocked on, so the action of sending the message will result in Task B
transitioning to the runnable state and be pushed into the current processor's
run queue. The processor will then pop the next task off of the run queue,
execute it, and repeat until it reaches task B.

The problem is that there can be significant latency between the time the
message is sent and task B gets executed. Further, "hot" data, such as the
message, is stored in the CPUs cache when it is sent but by the time task B gets
scheduled, there is a high probability that the relevant caches have gotten
purged.

To address this, the new Tokio scheduler implements an optimization (also found
in Go's and Kotlin's schedulers). When a task transitions to the runnable state,
instead of pushing it to the back of the run queue, it is stored in a special
"next task" slot. The processor will always check this slot before checking the
run queue. When inserting a task into this slot, if a task is already stored in
it, the old task is removed from the slot and pushed to the back of the run
queue. In the message passing case, this will result in the receiver of the
message to be scheduled to run next.

![Message passing optimization](/img/2019-10-scheduler/message_passing.png)

### Throttle stealing

In the work-stealing scheduler, when a processor's run queue is empty, the
processor will then attempt to steal tasks from sibling processors. To do this,
a random sibling is picked as a starting point and the processor performs a
steal operation on that sibling. If no tasks are found, the next sibling is
tried, and so on until tasks are found.

In practice, it is common for many processors to finish processing their run
queue around the same time. This happens when a batch of work arrives (for
example when `epoll` is polled for socket readiness). Processors are woken up,
they acquire tasks, run them, and are finished. This results in all processors
attempting to steal at the same time, which means many threads attempting to
access the same queues. This creates contention. Randomly picking the starting
point helps reduce contention, but it can still be pretty bad.

To work around this, the new scheduler limits the number of concurrent
processors performing steal operations. We call the processor state in which
processors attempt to steal as "searching for work", or the "searching" state
for short (this will come up later). This optimization is performed by having an
atomic int that the processor increments before starting to search and
decrements when exiting the searching state. The max number of searchers is half
the total number of processors. That said, the limit is sloppy, and that is OK.
We don't need a hard limit on the number of searchers, just a throttle. We trade
precision for algorithm efficiency.

Once in the searching state, the processor attempts to steal from sibling
workers and checks the global queue.

### Reducing cross thread synchronization

The other critical piece of a work-stealing scheduler is sibling notification.
This is where a processor notifies a sibling when it observes new tasks. If the
sibling is sleeping, it wakes up and steals tasks. The notification action has
another critical responsibility. Recall the queue algorithm used weak atomic
orderings (Acquire / Release). Because of how atomic memory ordering work,
without additional synchronization, there is no guarantee that a sibling
processor will ever see tasks in the queue to steal. The notification action
also is responsible for establishing the necessary synchronization for the
sibling processor to see the tasks in order to steal them. These requirements
make the notification action expensive. The goal is to perform the notification
action as little as possible without resulting in CPU under utilization, i.e. a
processor has tasks and a sibling is unable to steal them. Overeager
notification results in a thundering herd problem.

The original Tokio scheduler took a naive approach to notification. Whenever a
new task was pushed on to the run queue, a processor was notified. Whenever a
processor was notified and found a task upon waking, it would then notify yet
another processor. This logic very quickly resulted in all processor getting
woken up and searching for work (causing contention). Very often, most of these
processors failed to find work and went back to sleep.

The new scheduler significantly improves on this by borrowing the same technique
used in the Go scheduler. Notification is attempted at the same points as the
previous scheduler, however, notification only happens if there are no workers
in the searching state (see previous section). When a worker is notified, it is
immediately transitioned to the searching state. When a processor in the
searching state finds new tasks, it will first transition out of the searching
state, then notify another processor.

This logic has the effect of throttling the rate at which processors wake up. If
a batch of tasks is scheduled at once (for example, when `epoll` is polled for
socket readiness), the first one will result in notifying a processor. That
processor is now in the searching state. The rest of the scheduled tasks in the
batch will not notify a processor as there is at least one in the searching
state. That notified processor will steal half the tasks in the batch, and in
turn notify another processor. This third processor will wake up, find tasks
from one of the first two processors and steal half of those. This results in a
smooth ramp up of processors as well as rapid load balancing of tasks.

### Reducing allocations

The new Tokio scheduler requires only a single allocation per spawned task while
the old one required two. Previously, the Task struct looked something like:

```rust
struct Task {
    /// All state needed to manage the task
    state: TaskState,

    /// The logic to run is represented as a future trait object.
    future: Box<dyn Future<Output = ()>>,
}
```

The `Task` struct would then be allocated in a `Box` as well. This has always
been a wart that I have wanted to fix for a long time (I [first
attempted][astaire] to fix this in 2014). Since the old Tokio scheduler, two
things have changed. First, `std::alloc` stabilized. Second, the Future task
system switched to an explicit [vtable strategy][vtable]. These were the two
missing pieces needed to finally get rid of the double allocation per task
inefficiency.

Now, the `Task` structure is represented as:

```rust
struct Task<T> {
    header: Header,
    future: T,
    trailer: Trailer,
}
```

Both `Header` and `Trailer` are state needed to power the task, however they are
split between "hot" data (header) and "cold" data (trailer), i.e. roughly data
that is accessed often and data that is rarely used. The hot data is placed at
the head of the struct and is kept as small as possible. When the CPU
dereferences the task pointer, it will load a cache line sized amount of data at
once (between [64 and 128 bytes][lwn]). We want that data to be as relevant as
possible.

[astaire]:
  https://github.com/carllerche/astaire/blob/6b612e8f614f7351257e2957bd9092aea9ac3781/src/core/cell.rs#L205-L217
[vtable]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/task/struct.RawWakerVTable.html
[lwn]: https://lwn.net/Articles/252125/

### Reducing atomic reference counting

The final optimization we will discuss in this article is how the new scheduler
reduces the amount of atomic reference counts needed. There are many outstanding
references to the task structure: the scheduler and each waker hold a handle. A
common way to manage this memory is to use [atomic reference counting][arc].
This strategy requires an atomic operation each time a reference is cloned and
an atomic operation each time a reference is dropped. When the final reference
goes out of scope, the memory is freed.

In the old Tokio scheduler, each waker held a counted reference to the task
handle, roughly:

```rust
struct Waker {
    task: Arc<Task>,
}

impl Waker {
    fn wake(&self) {
        let task = self.task.clone();
        task.scheduler.schedule(task);
    }
}
```

When the task is woken, the reference is cloned (atomic increment). The
reference is then pushed into the run queue. When the processor receives the
task and is done executing it, it drops the reference resulting in an atomic
decrement. These atomic operations add up.

This problem has previously been identified by the designers of the
`std::future` task system. It was observed that when Waker::wake is called,
often times the original waker reference is no longer needed. This allows for
reusing the atomic reference count when pushing the task into the run queue. The
`std::future` task system now includes two "wake" APIs:

- [`wake`] which takes `self`
- [`wake_by_ref`] which takes `&self`.

This API design pushes the caller to use `wake` which avoids the atomic
increment. The implementation now becomes:

```rust
impl Waker {
    fn wake(self) {
        task.scheduler.schedule(self.task);
    }

    fn wake_by_ref(&self) {
        let task = self.task.clone();
        task.scheduler.schedule(task);
    }
}
```

This avoids the overhead of additional reference counting **only if** it is
possible to take ownership of the waker in order to wake. In my experience, it
is almost always desirable to wake with `&self` instead. Waking with `self`
prevents reusing the waker (useful in cases where the resource sends many
values, i.e. channels, sockets, ...) it also is more difficult to implement
thread-safe waking when `self` is required (the details of this will be left to
another article).

The new scheduler side steps the entire "wake by `self`" issue by avoiding the
atomic increment in `wake_by_ref`, making it as efficient as `wake(self)`. This
is done by having the scheduler maintain a list of all tasks currently active
(have not yet completed). This list represents the reference count needed to
push a task into the run queue.

The difficulty with this optimization is to ensure that the scheduler will not
drop any tasks from its list until it can be guaranteed that the task will not
be pushed into the run queue again. The specifics of how this is managed are
beyond the scope of this article, but I urge you to further investigate this in
the source.

[arc]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/sync/struct.Arc.html
[`wake`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/task/struct.Waker.html#method.wake
[`wake_by_ref`]:
  https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/task/struct.Waker.html#method.wake_by_ref

## Fearless (unsafe) concurrency with Loom

Writing correct, concurrent, lock-free code is really hard. It is better to be
slow and correct than fast and buggy, especially if those bugs relate to memory
safety. The best option is to be fast and correct. The new scheduler makes some
pretty aggressive optimizations and avoids most `std` types in order to write
more specialized versions. There is quite a bit of `unsafe` code in the new
scheduler.

There are a few ways to test concurrent code. One is to let your users do the
testing and debugging for you (an attractive option, to be sure). Another is to
write unit tests that run in a loop and hope it catches a bug. Maybe even throw
in [TSAN]. Of course, if this does catch a bug, there is no way to easily
reproduce it short of running the test in a loop again. Also, how long do you
run that loop for? Ten seconds? Ten minutes? Ten days? This used to be the state
of testing concurrent code with Rust.

[tsan]: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ThreadSanitizer.html

We did not find the status quo acceptable. We want to feel confident (well, as
confident as we can be) when we ship code -- especially concurrent, lock-free
code. Reliability is something that Tokio users have come to expect.

To address our need, we wrote a new tool: [Loom][loom]. Loom is a permutation
testing tool for concurrent code. Tests are written as normal, but when they are
executed with `loom`, `loom` will run the test many times, permuting all
possible executions and behaviors that test is able to encounter in a threaded
environment. It also validates correct memory access, freeing memory, etc...

As an example, here is a loom test for the new scheduler:

```rust
#[test]
fn multi_spawn() {
    loom::model(|| {
        let pool = ThreadPool::new();

        let c1 = Arc::new(AtomicUsize::new(0));

        let (tx, rx) = oneshot::channel();
        let tx1 = Arc::new(Mutex::new(Some(tx)));

        // Spawn a task
        let c2 = c1.clone();
        let tx2 = tx1.clone();
        pool.spawn(async move {
            spawn(async move {
                if 1 == c1.fetch_add(1, Relaxed) {
                    tx1.lock().unwrap().take().unwrap().send(());
                }
            });
        });

        // Spawn a second task
        pool.spawn(async move {
            spawn(async move {
                if 1 == c2.fetch_add(1, Relaxed) {
                    tx2.lock().unwrap().take().unwrap().send(());
                }
            });
        });

        rx.recv();
    });
}
```

It looks normal enough, but again, the bit of code within the `loom::model`
block gets run many thousands of times (probably in the millions), each time
with a slight variation in behavior. The exact ordering of threads changes each
time. Also, for every atomic operation, `loom` will try all different behaviors
permitted under the C++11 memory model. Recall how earlier, I mentioned that an
atomic load with `Acquire` was fairly weak and could return stale values. A
`loom` test will try every single possible value that can be loaded.

`loom` has been an invaluable tool to use while working on the new scheduler. It
caught more than 10 bugs that were missed by the other unit tests, hand testing,
and stress testing.

The astute reader might have questioned the claim that loom tests "all possible
permutations", and would be right to do so. Naive permutation of behavior would
result in combinatorial explosion at the factorial level. Any non trivial test
would never complete. This problem has been researched for years and a number of
algorithms exist to manage the combinatorial explosion. Loom's core algorithm is
based on [dynamic partial order reduction][dpor]. This algorithm is able to
prune out permutations that result in identical executions. Even with this, it
is possible for the state space to grow too large to complete in a reasonable
time (few minutes). Loom also allows bounding the search space using a bounded
variant of dynamic partial order reduction.

All in all, I am **much** more confident in the scheduler's correctness thanks
to extensive testing with Loom.

[loom]: https://github.com/carllerche/loom/
[dpor]: https://users.soe.ucsc.edu/~cormac/papers/popl05.pdf

## The results

So, now that we are done going over what schedulers are and how the new Tokio
scheduler achieved huge performance gains... what exactly were those gains?
Given that the new scheduler is very new, there has not been extensive
real-world testing yet. Here is what we do know.

First, the new scheduler is **much** faster in micro benchmarks. Here is how the
new scheduler improved on some benchmarks.

**Old scheduler**

```
test chained_spawn ... bench:   2,019,796 ns/iter (+/- 302,168)
test ping_pong     ... bench:   1,279,948 ns/iter (+/- 154,365)
test spawn_many    ... bench:  10,283,608 ns/iter (+/- 1,284,275)
test yield_many    ... bench:  21,450,748 ns/iter (+/- 1,201,337)
```

**New scheduler**

```
test chained_spawn ... bench:     168,854 ns/iter (+/- 8,339)
test ping_pong     ... bench:     562,659 ns/iter (+/- 34,410)
test spawn_many    ... bench:   7,320,737 ns/iter (+/- 264,620)
test yield_many    ... bench:  14,638,563 ns/iter (+/- 1,573,678)
```

The benchmarks include:

- `chained_spawn` tests recursively spawning a new task, i.e. spawn a task, that
  spawns a task, that spawns a task, ....
- `ping_pong` allocates a `oneshot` channel, spawns a task that sends a message
  on that channel. The original task waits to receive the message. This is the
  closest "real world" benchmark.
- `spawn_many` tests injecting tasks into the scheduler, i.e. spawning tasks
  from outside of the scheduler context.
- `yield_many` tests a task waking itself.

The improvements from the old scheduler to the new scheduler are very
impressive. However, how does that carry over to the "real world". It's hard to
say exactly, but I did try running [Hyper] benchmarks using the new scheduler.

This is the "hello world" Hyper server being benchmarked using
`wrk -t1 -c50 -d10`:

**Old scheduler**

```
Running 10s test @ http://127.0.0.1:3000
  1 threads and 50 connections
  Thread Stats   Avg      Stdev     Max   +/- Stdev
    Latency   371.53us   99.05us   1.97ms   60.53%
    Req/Sec   114.61k     8.45k  133.85k    67.00%
  1139307 requests in 10.00s, 95.61MB read
Requests/sec: 113923.19
Transfer/sec:      9.56MB
```

**New scheduler**

```
Running 10s test @ http://127.0.0.1:3000
  1 threads and 50 connections
  Thread Stats   Avg      Stdev     Max   +/- Stdev
    Latency   275.05us   69.81us   1.09ms   73.57%
    Req/Sec   153.17k    10.68k  171.51k    71.00%
  1522671 requests in 10.00s, 127.79MB read
Requests/sec: 152258.70
Transfer/sec:     12.78MB
```

That's an increase of 34% requests per second just from switching schedulers!
When I first saw this, I was more than happy. I had originally expected an
increase of ~5~10%. Then I was sad, because it also meant the old Tokio
scheduler is not that good, but oh well. Then I remembered that Hyper already
tops the [TechEmpower] benchmarks. I'm excited to see how the new scheduler will
impact those rankings.

[Tonic], a gRPC client & server, saw about a 10% speed up, which is pretty
impressive given that Tonic is not yet highly optimized.

[hyper]: https://github.com/hyperium/hyper/
[techempower]:
  https://www.techempower.com/benchmarks/#section=data-r18&hw=ph&test=plaintext
[tonic]: https://github.com/hyperium/tonic

## Conclusion

I'm really excited to finally get this work out. It has been in progress for
months now and is going to be a big step forward in Rust's asynchronous I/O
story. I'm very satisfied with the improvements the new scheduler work has shown
already. There also are plenty of areas in the Tokio code base that could be
sped up, so this new scheduler work is not the end on the performance front.

I also hope the amount of detail this article provides is useful for others who
may attempt to write a scheduler.

<div style="text-align:right">&mdash;Carl Lerche</div>
